In this final demo of this module,
I'm going to give you a nutshell whirlwind tour super
condensed of Windows PowerShell.
Now PowerShell and Windows 10 ship standard,
you get it whether you want to or not, also available in Windows Server.
I have an icon for it here on my taskbar,
but if you don't, of course,
you can open your Cortana search or your Start search and type PowerShell.
And then here's the deal.
You want to right-click that icon and you can pin or unpin it to the taskbar,
pin it or unpin it to your Start menu if you want it to appear there,
but I want you to get into the habit of starting your
PowerShell session as an administrator because there is very
little you can do as a standard user, there really isn't.
PowerShell is really for an administrator.
If you're a business end user,
maybe you don't even want to watch this demo and that's okay with me,
but if you are an administrator,
make sure you start as an administrator so that you have
administrative access in that console.
Let me double left-click and here is the console environment.
You can open the control box up here and come down to Properties.
One of the things you may want to do is navigate to the Font page.
I like Consolas and you can boost the font size and you can change the colors.
Some basic things here,
the three main commands that you want to get are get-command,
get-help, and get-member, but we won't deal with get-member here.
We'll just deal with a couple of the others like get-command.
Now you'll recall in the previous module we did some Hyper-V work, didn't we.
Actually, for grins,
let me come down to Cortana and type Hyper-V and start the Hyper-V
management graphical tool if for now other reason just to remind
myself of the ones that are there.
Okay, so we've got a couple of them.
If you want to figure out, for instance,
what we can do with Hyper-V, let's do get-command against the module,
and by the way, that's called tab complete what I just did.
I typed -M tab, then autocomplete in many cases will guess correctly,
Module hyper-v.
Whoa!
That's a lot of commands.
Let me scroll all the way up to the top again.
What we did is we said to PowerShell,
give me a list of all of the commands that are in the Hyper-V module.
How do we know that the Hyper-V module is installed?
Well because in the previous module,
remember we went to optional Windows features,
windows features, turn Windows features on or off,
and in there,
we made sure to install Hyper-V and we also installed the
Hyper-V module for Windows PowerShell and it looks like
there is a lot of commands.
They have standard verbs, add, disable, disconnect, enable, get.
Get is a really good cmdlet because it's so universal.
It's probably, in fact, I know for a fact,
it's the most common verb across all PowerShell.
Now what if we wanted to get a list of our VMs.
Well it would be Get-VM, wouldn't it.
Let me come back to the console, press Enter,
do a cls to clear the screen and let's do a
get-help on the cmdlet called get-vm.
We get very basic help back, but we don't get examples and stuff.
The reason for that is that we haven't updated our help.
You want to get into the habit of updating the help files on your machine,
in fact,
PowerShell doesn't ship with local help by default because the
idea is the documentation people at Microsoft are making tweaks
to the docs online all the time.
So by downloading help,
it ensures that you have the latest and greatest versions of those files.
So we'll wait for PowerShell to go through all available
modules and download the help content for them.
Once that process finishes,
and boy it took a long time on my system because remember I installed the RSAT,
the Remote Server Administration Tools so PowerShell,
by the way, when you install the RSAT tools,
you don't only get the graphic, all the snap-ins,
but you also get the PowerShell module.
So there was a lot of help to update.
We now can do a get-help get-vm and we can look at
specific things like examples.
This is a nice example here that shows the power of the pipeline.
Get-VM for a particular computer, now this could be a remote computer,
again, the power of PowerShell,
and then pipeline we can do where to filter on only those VMs that are running.
So let's try that actually.
Let's do a get-vm where the ComputerName is localhost,
that's our local machine, and I'll do a where object,
Where $_.
State, and what that is, by the way,
is $_ is what's called a sigil or a placeholder for
the current object in the pipeline.
So if we had 10 VMs,
then those 10 VMs are 1 by 1 going to be passed into
Where-Object and $_ means for each one of those look at the
state property and I'm going to say not equal to Running because
I know that both of mine are stopped.
And sure enough, we see both of those machines there.
Okay.
Now if I want to store one as a variable, I can.
Get, I'm going to do $vm get-vm where the name is ws2k12r2.
I guess I can show you get-member.
If you pipe a variable, for instance, to get-member,
it gives you a list of all of the properties.
Properties think of as metadata or status information and
methods refer to actions that you can take.
I was hoping that we would be able to start a VM here,
but it looks like those methods aren't visible at this point.
That's too bad.
Now is there a command called start-vm.
We can use get-command such that the verb is start and the noun contains vm,
*vm* means any cmdlet that includes VM and I have some Azure
cmdlets installed as you can see here.
That's what the first three options are,
and sure enough, there is a Start-VM cmdlet so it looks like we can do Start-VM.
Let's do a get-help start-vm examples, yeah, just passing the name.
So start-vm, the name is, uh-oh, I forgot what it's called again,
so let's do a get-vm and now I'll do start-vm where the name is ws2k12r2.
I don't need the quotes here because there are no spaces in the VM's name,
but I like to do it as a general habit.
Okay, so it's starting.
So to test this, we should be able to come into the Hyper-V management console,
and sure enough, we see that ws2k12r2 VM is in a starting and now running state.
Nice.
And as you'd expect, of course, we could use stop-vm to stop.
You see how intuitive that is, that's why Jeffrey Snover,
and Bruce Payette,
and some other very smart people at Microsoft put together PowerShell to make it intuitive for non-programmers to do programmer-y things.